The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Descent of the Branch into the Waters of
Sorrow, by John Church


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Descent of the Branch into the Waters of Sorrow
       to bring up the Election of Grace


Author: John Church



Release Date: December 26, 2018  [eBook #58548]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESCENT OF THE BRANCH INTO THE
WATERS OF SORROW***


Transcribed from the 1817 R. Thomas edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org  Many thanks to the British Library for allowing their
copy to be consulted.

                   [Picture: Public domain book cover]





                              _THE DESCENT_
                                    OF
                                THE BRANCH
                                 INTO THE
                           _WATERS OF SORROW_,
                               TO BRING UP
                          The Election of Grace.


                          BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF
                                A Sermon,

                               PREACHED BY
                                J. CHURCH,
                       _OF THE SURREY TABERNACLE_.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

            “AND HE CRIED UNTO THE LORD, AND THE LORD SHEWED HIM A
              TREE, WHICH WHEN HE HAD CAST INTO THE WATERS, THE
                           WATERS WERE MADE SWEET.”

            “AND IF WE ARE AFFLICTED IT IS FOR YOUR CONSOLATION.”

                                * * * * *

                                Southwark:
          Printed by R THOMAS, No, 11, RED LION STREET, Borough.

                                  1817.

                                * * * * *




A Sermon.


                           2 KINGS, 6th Chap. v. 6.

    _And the Man of God said_, _Where fell it_?  _And he shewed him the
    place_, _and he cut down a stick_, _and cast it in thither_, _and the
    iron did swim_.

ALL scripture is written for our instruction in the knowledge of the
Person and Work of God our dear Saviour, as the only foundation of our
hope, the object of our faith and love, the only refuge of guilty man,
the brightness of the Father’s glory, and the express image of his love,
his wisdom, and his infinite condescension.  Holy men of old spake, and
wrote the sacred scriptures, under the divine influence of the Holy
Ghost.  Christ is the main object they all believed in, looked to, hoped
for, and held forth to succeeding generations.  Christ is the substance
of the whole Bible; every passage, in some way or other, like the Star of
Bethlehem, points to him; and the most wise and spiritual children of the
Most High, as divinely taught, must be ever upon the look-out for Jesus
in every part of the divine word.  Christ is in every doctrine, in every
sacred illustrious character, in every type, in every ordinance, and in
every precept, in every promise, and every Old Testament history, as well
as every New Testament parable: and where the mind is sweetly influenced
by the love of Jesus, it gladly receives Christ wherever it is given by
the Spirit to see him.

I would not be wise above what is written, nor would I attempt to force
the meaning of the blessed Spirit, or misapply it to answer any purpose;
but I must humbly beg to remark, that in reading the circumstance which I
have selected for a text, my mind was at first forcibly struck with the
account; and looking up for wisdom to preach on it, and having been
favored with the gracious presence of my Lord in handling it, I could no
longer suppress my own feelings, with the earnest solicitations of many
that heard it, who were apparently blessed by this feeble testimony, I
present it in the simple form, as in part preached.  I have tried to
retain the substance, though I am not able to write verbatim, what was
delivered: I only aim at setting forth the glory of the dear Saviour, as
held forth in this passage, to the Church; that by comparing spiritual
truths with spiritual experiences, some of God’s tried people may be
built up in their most holy faith, and sweetly led to see that they have
not believed in vain.

We find in this history, that the Spirit of Prophecy in the Church was
increasing in the land; this was doubtless a favourable sign, for _where
there is no vision the people perish_; and truly happy is that land which
abounds in spiritual ministers, spiritual ordinances, and spiritual
people.  The increase of Prophets rendered it necessary that they should
be convened together, tor the promotion of each other’s knowledge and
comfort.  We find there was a College of them at Gilgal, over which the
prophet Elisha was a President, in the room of his Predecessor Elijah.
We would, indeed, humbly hope, this College of Prophets, was a blessing
to the Church, and that the Candidates for the Ministry were really moved
by the Holy Ghost, to take upon them that sacred office; but, alas! in
those days was Gehazi, and others, who, it is to be feared, never were
taught either Law or Gospel, experimentally; and may we not adopt the old
Church Service, and exclaim, with grief of heart, _As it was in the
beginning is now_?  But our most blessed Lord will do all his will,
perform all his gracious purposes, and as the great Head of the Church,
and Saviour of the body, he must bring all his redeemed to the knowledge
of himself, and at last home to glory, by all the means his own infinite
wisdom has planned, whether they are educated at a Collage, or not.
Human learning is a blessing to the Church, when sanctified; but most
mere letter-learned men, like Pilate, fix their Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
upon the head of Christ, instead of laying it at his feet, as Paul did.
Most probably the College of Gilgal was at this time full, so that some
of the Sons of the Prophets asked leave to go to Jordan, and reside
there—we are informed of the reason of this request, in the first of this
chapter.  Their piety, humility, and industry are evident.  The matter
was laid before Elisha and before the Lord, by him; so should God’s dear
ministers and people ever act—_for in the multitude of counsellors there
is safety_; and hence that very important advice, _In all thy ways
acknowledge him_, _and he shall direct thy paths_.  The humility of their
minds is as clearly revealed; they did not desire a mansion, or even an
elegant college, but only an humble cot—a little, with the fear and love
of God, is far, yea, infinitely preferable to great riches.  The main
study of ministers should be usefulness; great riches seldom promote much
spirituality in ministers or people: those who are running an heavenly
race, should not load themselves with thick clay.  The gospel ministry is
called a warfare, and an aged father in the church, observes to his son
Timothy, _No man that warreth should entangle himself in the affairs of
this life_—that is, if he can avoid it.

Not only the piety and humility of these good men are evident, but their
industry; not to be burdensome to any, they went to work themselves, in
the thicket, near the river Jordan, the resort of wild beasts; but the
appointed path of duty, is, in general, the place of safety; here the
Lord had directed them, and being in _his_ way, he doubtless honoured
them with _his_ protecting, supporting, and approving smile.—Elisha was
with them, superintending their affairs, and entreating the Lord for
their success.  This act, thus recorded by the divine Spirit, of the
conduct of the Prophets, in cutting down the thickets of trees, and
building an House, might perhaps have brought to their minds, the work to
which they were called, and for which they were preparing.—Sinners are
called Trees; the Gospel is compared to an Axe; Ministers are called
Labourers; and if they find but little success in their work, they are
directed to Jesus for strength, and to the blessed Spirit for wisdom to
aim right.  Perhaps Solomon alludes to this, when he says, _If the Iron
be blunt_, _he must put to the more strength_; _but wisdom is profitable
to direct_.—Agreeable to this is the language of our Lord to his
Disciples, when fishing; he said, _Follow we_, _and I will make you
fishers of men_.  Thus instructed by Jesus, they could spiritualize their
employment as fishers.  This World is called a Sea, the Church a Ship,
Men are compared to Fish, Ministers to fishermen, and the Gospel to a Net
cast into the Sea; thus out dear Lord improved any circumstance, for the
instruction of his dear people.

It appears, the Prophets were not ashamed to handle an hammer, or an axe,
nor did their Master forbid it; they were mechanics, as well as
preachers.  The Lord has often called the meanest of men to the highest
office in the Church of God, and made them eminently useful: David from
keeping Sheep; Elisha from the Plough’s-tail; Amos from gathering
Sycamore-fruit; the Apostles from their Barges; and those Prophets to
handle the axe, the saw, and the hammer.  Their work as Carpenters and
Builders, serves to remind them of their spiritual occupation—and it is
worthy of observation, that when the Holy Spirit shewed Zechariah in
vision, of the future opposition that would be made against the kingdom
of Jesus, in the Gospel Dispensation, he shewed him four Horns, and after
that, he shewed him four Carpenters, who were to fray them, cut them
down; and such were the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel in the four
parts of the World; who were to fell trees, cut them down, lay them low,
fit them, square them according to God’s Word, and thus build them up an
habitation for God, through the Spirit.

Our text relates, that as one was felling a Beam, the head of his Axe
fell into the water; (most probably into Jordan).  This was a grief to
him, for the reason he assigned, so that he cried to Elisha, and said,
_Alas_, _master_, _for it is borrowed_!  Possessing a spirit of honesty,
and being too poor to make it good to the lender, he applied to Elisha,
not to work a miracle, that we can tell, but because the man’s Axe was
sunk, and the Prophet’s work stopped.  Thus, ministers have constantly
something to try them in their work; they well know the world is always
ready to reproach them, and the glorious cause they espouse, which fills
them with grief, but leads them to the dear Saviour, to appear in the
love of his heart, and in the power of his arm, for their deliverance,
who always kindly assures them his grace is sufficient for them.  Some
have conjectured that this man was an hypocrite, or a figure of all false
preachers, who run unsent of God; who preach a borrowed experience, a
borrowed system of religion; who are only in the letter, and not in the
spirit; of whose religion and preaching, like the poor man’s Axe, it may
be truly said, _Alas_! _master_, _for it was borrowed_.  And hence God
threatens the Prophets, that steal his words from others, and declares
they shall not profit this people at all; nor can unconverted, graceless
preachers profit the experimental children of God.  A preacher must be
taught the plague of his own heart, the spirituality of God’s Law, the
value of a precious Jesus, in his Person and Work, by God the Spirit,
before he can be useful to the Church.  We must first know, then speak
what we know, as the Apostle says, _We can but speak of the things which
we have seen_, _and we are his witnesses_.  Many may borrow words from
real saints, and may appear like believers indeed; nor can even the
brightest saint at all times tell a hypocrite from a saint, but the day
will declare it—_then_, _then shall ye return_, _and discern between the
righteous and the wicked_—a mere borrowed religion will let the soul sink
in death, but the free gift of God is eternal life—locked up in Christ,
manifested by the Spirit, and leads the soul to rest, live, and rejoice
alone in the everlasting love of God, the free, unmerited grace of an
everlasting covenant, the glorious person, and finished work of Christ,
as its all in all.

The Prophet seeing the situation of his pupil, cut down a stick from a
tree, and cast it into the water, when behold a most astonishing miracle
appears—the stick, contrary to its native tendency, sunk, and brought up
the iron head of the axe, which swam, contrary to its natural
gravitation.—The man no doubt joyfully received it, and went on with his
work.  What cannot, what will not the God of Israel do for his people, to
shew he is the Lord their God, that they are his servants, and that they
are acting agreeable to his will.  The Lord confirmeth the work of his
servants and frustrateth the tokens of liars; and surely the petition of
Elijah is exactly adapted, in many cases, to God’s dear ministers, when
he prayed, and said, _Lord God_, _let it be known this day that I am thy
servant_, _that this is thy people_, _and that I have done all these
things according to thy word_.

Our text reads thus: _But as one was felling a beam_, _the axe head fell
into the water_; _and he cried_, _and said_, _Alas_! _Master_, _for it
was borrowed_.  _And the man of God said_, _Where fell it_?  _And he
shewed him the place_.  _And he cut down a stick and cast it in thither_,
_and the iron did swim_—_therefore said he_, _take it up to thee_, _and
he put out his hand_, _and took it_.

In further considering this most instructive subject, I would take
occasion to notice our fall and recovery, in the two heads; Adam, the
sinful head and representative of all mankind; and the adorable Jesus,
the elect head of his dear people.  It is a solemn and a glorious truth,
that as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive.  Or, as
the learned say it is literally in the Greek, All in Adam die; all in
Christ shall be made alive.  Here are the two heads, and no more—the one
represents all mankind—the second Adam, all his children given to him,
loved, redeemed, and saved by him.  Much has been said and written on the
subject of the Fall of Man: great indeed was that Fall, and dreadful has
been the consequences of it.  All the miseries in earth and hell are the
consequences of it.  Alas! how deeply fallen is man into the mire of
corruption, sin, and folly; and into the waters of deep affliction—sunk,
as iron cast or dropped into the waters of Jordan, which naturally
gravitates to its own centre.  Our nature was sunk so deep, that it was
apparently lost, and so incapacitated, that it has no more power to come
up out of it, than iron has to swim of itself, independent of a
miracle—covered over, sunk in earth, yea, the Apostle asserts, it is
earthly, sensual, and devilish; having fallen from wisdom, and become
foolish; from righteousness, and become a criminal; from holiness, and
become impure; and from happy freedom, to awful bondage.  The powers of
the soul, all the noble talents that were only lent; these are awfully
depraved, yea, so evil, that I am bold to assert, no man can believe he
is as vile as the Bible declares him, till he is put in the possession of
the faith of God’s elect.  There requires as much divine power, to credit
the state of man, as to believe in the salvation of the soul.  The same
faith the holy Spirit gives to see Jesus, believe in Jesus, and rest on
Jesus, is required to believe the desperate depravity of the human heart.
The same light in which I see the new man, I see the old; in the same
teaching I see truth, I discover the aboundings of error, and by the same
anointing I behold my standing in the second Adam, I see my fall in the
first.  But it is well for the people of God, who are acquainted with
their fallen natures, that the holy Spirit leads them to see the glorious
remedy in the gospel; that as the Law enters, sin being discovered,
weakness felt, corruption a burden, misery groaned under, and the awful
consequences deplored.  The Gospel is so highly esteemed by such persons,
and none know the value of the Gospel, but those who feel their sins, and
see them in the light of the Law, as deserving the wrath of a holy God;
and finding the utter impossibility of keeping the Law, in thought, word,
or deed—that the law condemns most justly for a sinful thought, as well
as a sinful action.  Hence the dear Redeemer, in his grand Sermon on the
Mount, preached this Law in its spirituality, and insisted upon it, that
anger in the heart against another without cause, was murder; and a
lustful glance of the eye, adultery.  Truly believing this testimony from
the word, and by the teaching of the Spirit out of the Law, we must
exclaim, What flesh can be saved?  The scripture answers, (and all the
election of grace is brought to believe it) _Therefore by the deeds of
the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight_.  But it is the grand
design of the Gospel, to open to a poor sinner, the glorious plan of
salvation, by the joint work of the ever adorable trinity in unity.  And
it is the business of gospel ministers, to be ever stating the precious
truths of the Gospel, and pointing poor guilty man to the blessed means
whereby he can be justified and pardoned.  This leads me to notice the
conduct of the Prophet; when the man cried on account of his loss to him,
he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither, and the iron did swim.  Many
great events were done at Jordan, it divided when the Israelites were to
pass over to Canaan.  As soon as the Ark, borne upon the shoulders of the
priests, made its appearance, the waters parted.  Hence the Psalmist
asks, _What ailed thee_, _O thou Sea_, _that thou fleddest_, _and thou
Jordan_, _that thou wast driven back_.  Another text answers, _The waters
saw thee_, _O God_, _in the midst of Jordon_.  Joshua set up twelve
stones in remembrance of the surprising event.  Jacob passed over it
twice, once with a heavy disconsolate heart, in leaving his home—and
twenty years after, he passed the same place, and called to remembrance
the gracious conduct of his God; _with this Staff I passed over Jordan_,
_and now I am become two bands_.  Elijah and Elisha smote the waters of
Jordan with the same Mantle, but the most distinguished honour that was
ever conferred on Jordan, was the descent of the lovely Son of God into
them, by the ordinance of baptism, when the adorable Spirit alighted upon
him, visible, though in the manner in which a Dove hovers in its descent;
and Jesus was anointed to enter into his great work, while the Father
bore testimony to him as his beloved Son, in whom he rested, pleased with
him, and all his dear people in him.  In the waters of Jordan the Axe
head fell, and gravitating to its centre, sunk deep, no doubt, in the
mire at the bottom, but a stick is cut down, cast in, sinks deep, and
brings up the head, by causing it to swim—this was the means; and who can
read this circumstance with attention, but must be reminded of him, who
is the stem of Jesse, who was so many years typified by the rod of Moses,
who performed so many wonders for the children of Israel, and is, in a
certain sense, doing the same for his people in the wilderness to this
day.  He was also typified by the rod of Aaron, which budded, blossomed,
and yielded almonds—to all human appearance, a very unpromising object, a
dry stick.  This is he, of whom the prophet Isaiah spake, perhaps in
allusion to Aaron’s rod, _He shall come up before him like a tender
plant_, _and as a root out of a dry ground_; to all human appearance, a
very unlikely person to be the Messiah, the Saviour of men.  But another
chapter holds forth his qualifications, _And there shall come forth a rod
out of the stem of Jesse_, _and a branch shall grow out of his root_.  So
says the Lord by another Prophet, _Behold my servant_, _the Branch_.  And
the Lord again, by Ezekiel, says, _I will take off the top of his branch
a young twig_, _and I will set it_, _and under his branches shall dwell
all fowl of every wing_.  And perhaps, in allusion to this, the dear
Saviour compares himself to a grain of mustard seed, small when sown, but
large when grown, so that the birds of the air lodge in the branches
thereof.  This was to shew the reality of his human nature, his amazing
condescension, his deep abasement, and the meanness of his descent.  As
man, humbled himself to the form of a servant, and as the saviour of the
body, of which he is the head, the Father called him to the great work of
redemption, and said, _Thou art my servant_, _O Israel_, _in whom I will
be glorified_.  He gave him to the church, to deliver it from the ruins
of the fall, and, as a Branch, he was cut off from the land of the
living.  Hence the prediction, _Messiah shall be cut off_, _but not for
himself_.  He was indeed cut off from the synagogue of the Jews, from the
carnal worldling, and from the proud Pharisee.  He was cut off from his
own relatives, from his own dear disciples for a time, from every earthly
comfort and convenience, and cut off from the land of the living, by a
most violent, painful, and shameful death; _for the transgression of my
people was he stricken_.  He was cast into the deep waters.  He had been
baptized in water at Jordan—now he must be baptized in blood, and sweet,
and tears.  Hence his deep afflictions are called waters; and he sighed
and said, _Save me O God_, _the waters are come in unto my soul_.  _I
sink in deep mire_.  _I am come into deep waters_, _where the floods
overflow me_.  _Deliver me out of the deep waters_, _and out of the
mire_.  _Let me be delivered from them that hate me_.  Hence we see our
dear Lord sinking with the blood of our guilt, bearing our sins,
sustaining our curse, and enduring the hell that we had merited—

    He sunk beneath our heavy woes,
    To raise us to his throne.

This tells his gracious design to fetch us up from destruction, to make
atonement for all our transgressions, to fulfil all the Law’s demands, to
satisfy the justice of God, to harmonize every divine attribute, to
redeem his dear people from the curse, to open a way of access to God, to
sanctify every temporal blessing, to incense the gift of the Holy Ghost,
and that our old man might be crucified, that the whole body of death
might be destroyed, to conquer sin, to subdue Satan, to bar the mouth of
hell, to rend the vail of the temple, to open the pearly gates of the
celestial city, to remove spiritual death, to take away the sting of
temporal death, to finish transgression, make an end of sin, bring in an
everlasting righteousness, make reconciliation for iniquity, and to make
himself an everlasting name; and he must, he shall have, all the glory,
from first to last.  Thus Jews died for these grand purposes—death is our
life; he hath raised us up in himself, raised up our poor fallen natures
indeed; and by virtue of his work we are restored to the image of God in
regeneration, to communion with God in conversion, and to the likeness of
Christ in our resurrection.  Glory be to his dear name for stooping so
low to raise us so high; nor will he ever give over the wonders of his
grace till we are raised out of the mire of corruption, indwelling sin,
and out of the waters of all affliction; for the Lord will perfect his
begun good work, for his mercy endureth for ever.

Thus we see our fall, and our recovery in Christ.  Not that the dear
people of God, in one sense, ever fell out of the flavour of God, or were
ever liable to be damned; but the nature of sin in God’s people is the
same as in the reprobate, and requires an infinite satisfaction—this
being given a free proclamation is issued out to all who feel their need
of this Jesus; they are welcome to him, and he has graciously assured
such he will in no wise cast them out—and this is a promise worth a
thousand worlds, and gladly accepted by them that believe, _That Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners_.—Praise ye the Lord.

There is one thought more worthy our attention as the people of God.
When the Apostle enumerates the vast privileges of God’s dear children,
as one with Christ, the property of Christ, as Christ is God’s—he infers
that the ministry of the Gospel is none of the smallest in the inventory:
_all are yours_, _whether Paul or Cephas_—implying that the calling and
qualification of ministers is for the Church: and the Apostle adds, in
another place, that even the very afflictions of the ministers are for
the Church.  Hence, he says, _If we be afflicted it is for your
consolation_.  And again, _All things are for your sakes_.  So then death
worketh in us, but life in you.  For this cause we faint not.  As a
Candle which burneth, consumeth away itself to give light to others, so
it is true of ministers; they are quickened by the Spirit, united to
Jesus, love his person, name, and work, his truths, his people, and his
ways.  And being called into public life, by the great head of the
church, they are cut off from the world and its maxims, its religion, and
its bare form the power.  They are cast into many waters of affliction;
they are plunged deep, even into the mire, to bring up some poor soul by
their instrumentality.  Why are they led to feel more deep the depravity
of the human heart, but that they might be able to describe its workings.
Why are they so deeply exercised with the discipline of the Law, but that
they might describe the cases of them who are under its workings, and so
often liable to a spirit of bondage.  Why have they uncommon temptations
from the adversary, but that they, like their divine Lord, might
sympathize with the tempted, and being well acquainted with Satan’s
devices, that they might expose them.  Why cast down because of the
troubles of the way, but that they might seek only to Jesus; that they
might learn, experimentally, how to make use of a precious Saviour, as
exactly adapted for such cases.  Why more reproached.  Why more exposed
to temptations.  Why is Satan more busy with them.  Why, perhaps, more
tried in their families; plagued with erroneous characters of every
description; tried in the world; perplexed in the church; in perils often
among false brethren; exercised in mind, with the sins of professors; the
weakness of God’s own dear children; the envy of their own brethren; and
the aboundings of iniquity and error in the World.  The fears of not
being called to the work aright; the little success they meet with; their
dead seasons in the pulpit; and the very little progress in the Church
among God’s children, in their knowledge of divine things.  The
instability of their hearers; the cruel criticisms, uncharitable
reflections, and unpleasant speeches, mixed with the contempt of the
proud.  The apostacy of some from the truth, after a blazing profession,
and professing to be called under our ministry; with the envy of poor
niggardly professors, who, perhaps, never gave a shilling to the cause of
Jesus, yet grudge every good thing the Lord gives them, and they receive
with the sanction of the great head of the church, the heir of all
things.  These, and many more afflictions the dear ministers of the
sanctuary experience.  Oh! if many pious young men, who are anxious for
the ministry, even from the best of motives, if they could foresee what
they would pass through before they finish their course, they would
venture forward with more trembling steps than they do.  These trials
made one of the greatest preachers (next to our dear Lord himself)
exclaim, _Who is sufficient for these things_?  But glory be to Jesus,
our sufferings are of God, and our trials are not merely for ourselves,
as believers, but for the sake of God’s dear children.  We are often cast
into these deep waters, to dive after some who have sunk very low in
soul, either in the waters of affliction, or in the deep mire of known,
felt, lamented, and painful corruptions.  This teaching made Paul
understand all things, and all men: if he met with a soul in deep
terrors, he could describe their state, and point out their feelings,
having known the terrors of the Lord.  If in bondage, if filled with
fears, if depressed in soul, if exercised with fiery darts, if fearful of
falling away, if fallen into sin, if distressed with a load of trials, if
persecuted, reproached, apparently forsaken, and dejected, he knows how
to prescribe the remedy, as well as to describe the state, both is a
mercy—and to be led by the divine Spirit, to be deeply acquainted with
sin and its miseries, with Jesus and his salvation, experimentally; to be
called, and enabled to preach both, with the testimony of God to the
soul, is a mercy for a minister; and what is he without such teaching?
For the whole design of the Spirit, leading to all the miseries of our
fallen nature, is but to endear Christ, and that we might prize the
precious truths of the Gospel, as they exhibit to us the only remedy for
all our woes; the mystery of the adorable trinity in unity, with the
several covenant acts of love to the election of grace; the glorious
undertaking of our adorable surety; the exact suitability of Jesus; his
infinite birth, his infinite life of obedience, his most wonderful death,
his glorious resurrection, his prevalent intercession, his covenant
engagements, his precious promises, his gracious presence, his
astonishing pity, his boundless compassion, his free grace, his saving
offices, his glorious perfections, his mediatorial glories, his sweet
titles, his precious characters, and his numerous appearances for his
church.  These clearly stated to God’s chosen, without the mixture of
free-will, human performances, or any of the effects of old Adam’s
nature, will be owned and blessed to God’s own children, their glorious
remedy for every malady; while the faithful minister will be led to see
the gracious design of his God, in permitting him to feel, and leading
him into deep waters.

I conclude by observing once more on this subject, that all the Lord’s
children are the subjects of many sinkings of soul, arising from inbred
sin, felt guilt, lamented depravity, heavy trials, sore besetments,
family troubles, and grievous backslidings.  The holy Spirit is always
carrying on his own work, by leading us daily to see and feel what we
are, as sinners, in the first Adam’s head; and what we are, as saints, in
Christ Jesus, the second Adam, the Lord from heaven.  This is blessed
teaching, it leads from all self-righteousness, self-wisdom,
self-dependance, and self-adulation; it leads alone to the dear God-man
Mediator, as the glorious fountain of untreated good, as the centre of a
believing soul, and as its eternal all in all.  The teachings of the
Spirit, though accompanied with numerous trials, known only to those who
are taught of God, are, at the same time, sweet evidences of our eternal
election, divine predestination, gracious adoption, compleat
justification, and eternal pardon.  And the holy Spirit has engaged to
act as a gracious comforter in the soul, to fetch us up when sunk in
sorrow, dismay, and despair; and will put this sweet song in our mouths,
_He brought me up also out of the horrible pit and mirey clay_.  And he
will also quicken our mortal bodies, and bring us up again from the
territories of the grave; for the Lord said, _I will bring again from
Bashan_; _I will bring my people up again from the depths of the Sea_.

                                * * * * *

                                  FINIS.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESCENT OF THE BRANCH INTO THE
WATERS OF SORROW***


******* This file should be named 58548-0.txt or 58548-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/8/5/4/58548


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

